[Amit Varma]: Programs like Make in India and Skill India may be very popular in the country today,
[Amit Varma]: but the truth of the matter is that economic growth usually happens in spite of the government
[Amit Varma]: and not because of it. Society solves its own problems and markets are the mechanism
[Amit Varma]: by which that happens. Back in the day, if you were a young entrepreneur who wanted to
[Amit Varma]: start a business, you would have to maybe put your own savings into it or try and take
[Amit Varma]: a loan from a bank or convince elders in your community to help you out. There was friction
[Amit Varma]: in all of this. It was hard to reach scale and completely wild ideas that had a 1% chance
[Amit Varma]: of changing the world, but a 99% chance of failing would never get through. But over
[Amit Varma]: the last few decades, we have seen the rise of venture capital and angel investing with
[Amit Varma]: rich people pooling their money to fund new businesses or successful businessmen with
[Amit Varma]: lived experience, offering their own money and guidance to early stage companies. The
[Amit Varma]: utility of this is obvious. In a nutshell, it is rational for me to give 10 rupees each
[Amit Varma]: to 10 companies if one of them makes 110 rupees, even if all the others fail. This makes moonshot
[Amit Varma]: ideas more likely to get funded and failure does not carry a stigma with it anymore. And
[Amit Varma]: indeed, so many of the giant companies that dominate the world today, like Google and
[Amit Varma]: Amazon and Facebook, have depended on just this kind of funding model to reach their
[Amit Varma]: present heights. Of course, many big mistakes have been made by people with money, and some
[Amit Varma]: of SoftBank's multi-billion misadventures come to mind, as do much hyped unicorns that
[Amit Varma]: seem more like a Ponzi scheme than a legit business. But this is the beauty of capitalism.
[Amit Varma]: There is space to make mistakes, and many companies and venture funds will indeed crash
[Amit Varma]: and fail, just as many won't. And in the end, society will be better off.
[Unknown]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Unknown]: science. Please welcome your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen. The topic of today's episode is the startup ecosystem
[Amit Varma]: in India. And my guest is my friend, Mohit Satyanand. Mohit's been on the show before
[Amit Varma]: in a very popular episode from last year about two economic crisis of 2007 and 2019. We discussed
[Amit Varma]: his personal journey at some length in that episode, but not so much his journey as an
[Amit Varma]: early stage investor and mentor to young companies, which is a significant part of how he spends
[Amit Varma]: his time these days. Given his background understanding of the economy, and indeed our
[Amit Varma]: society, I've always found his insights on our startup ecosystem to be sharp and illuminating.
[Amit Varma]: So this conversation was overdue. Before we get to it, though, let's take a quick commercial
[Amit Varma]: break. If you enjoy listening to the scene and the
[Amit Varma]: unseen, you can play a part in keeping the show alive. The scene and the unseen has been
[Amit Varma]: a labor of love. I've enjoyed putting together many stimulating conversations, expanding
[Amit Varma]: my brain and my universe, and hopefully yours as well. But while the work has been its own
[Amit Varma]: reward, I don't actually make much money off the show. Although the scene and the unseen
[Amit Varma]: has great numbers, advertisers haven't really woken up to the insane engagement level of
[Amit Varma]: podcasts. I do many, many hours of deep research for each episode, besides all the logistics
[Amit Varma]: of producing the show myself, scheduling guests, booking studios, paying technicians, the travel
[Amit Varma]: and so on. So well, I'm trying a new way of keeping this thing going. And that involves
[Amit Varma]: you. My proposition for you is this. For every episode of the scene and the unseen that you
[Amit Varma]: enjoy, buy me a cup of coffee, or even a lavish lunch, whatever you feel it's worth. You can
[Amit Varma]: do this by heading over to seen unseen.in slash support and contributing an amount of
[Amit Varma]: your choice. This is not a subscription. The scene and the unseen will continue to be free
[Amit Varma]: on all podcast apps and at seen unseen.in. This is just a gesture of appreciation. Help
[Amit Varma]: keep the scene going. Seen unseen.in slash support.
[Amit Varma]: Mohit, welcome to the scene and the unseen. Thanks so much.
[Amit Varma]: Mohit, in the last episode we did together, we spoke a lot about your journey through
[Amit Varma]: life in general, and we covered a vast sweep of time. I mean, before I come to journey
[Amit Varma]: of your last five years as an early stage investor and mentor and so on, you were once
[Amit Varma]: an entrepreneur yourself decades ago. Tell me a bit about that.
[Guest]: Wow. My journey to entrepreneurship began in a way which was sort of in between being
[Guest]: an employee and an entrepreneur. So a very dear school and college friend of mine who
[Guest]: joined the family business on finishing college was very unhappy that I was going off to Bombay
[Guest]: to work in a multinational. The multinational was Hindustan Lever, partly because you treasured
[Guest]: your friends and you wanted them to live close to you. And partly because he thought that
[Guest]: I could do more for him and his family business than I could for Hindustan Lever. And he was
[Guest]: absolutely right. I was very reluctant because family business in the 70s was almost a pejorative.
[Guest]: It was assumed that it would be corrupt, that black money would be generated, that these
[Guest]: were greedy people and so on and so forth. So it was not a leap that I was willing to
[Guest]: make quite apart from the fact that it had the word family associated with it and I didn't
[Guest]: see myself getting involved with all kinds of peculiar and difficult relations. But four
[Guest]: years later, my friend, whose name was also Mohit, came to Bombay and said, let's have
[Guest]: a drink. And I immediately knew that this was more than just a drink. And about half
[Guest]: an hour later, he couldn't contain himself and said, look, I have an offer for you. There's
[Guest]: no family left in the family business. It's just me. And I know that you don't want to
[Guest]: get involved with what we do. So why don't you come and start something new for me? And
[Guest]: this is the amount of money I have available. I said, yes, on the spot. No questions about
[Guest]: what, how much money, what he would pay me. In fact, he was taken aback and said, don't
[Guest]: you want to know how much I'm going to pay you? I'm sure you'll pay me well, not an issue.
[Guest]: And he actually said, I will ensure that there's no interference between the existing ecosystem,
[Guest]: the company I run, and what you do. You're on your own. And I spent a very interesting
[Guest]: year and a half or two looking at various areas. It was a completely open. Here in Delhi,
[Guest]: in 81. And to cut a long story short, we ended up setting up India's first successful packaged
[Guest]: snack. It's interesting, actually, that we should be recording this now in February 2020,
[Guest]: because that journey, which began with the launch of this product cracks in 1984, has
[Guest]: for us, both for Mohit and me, just ended because they sold the company at a valuation
[Guest]: of 1250 crores to an American private equity firm. So now it's very interesting, actually,
[Guest]: and I'm perhaps preempting some of the questions that you're going to ask to contrast 1981-84
[Guest]: with 2014-20. Because in that particular case, I got a salary. I was to get a share of the
[Guest]: profits, as in when the company made profits, but I was primarily an employee.
[Guest]: You didn't own a piece of the company.
[Guest]: No, I didn't own a piece of the company. There was no company. In fact, it was a division
[Guest]: of the existing company. Today, a bright and lucky young man, Mohit 2.0, would say, I want
[Guest]: to set up a new company manufacturing space-age snacks. And he wouldn't go to somebody with
[Guest]: a project and say, will you invest the money? He would get the idea rolling, and he would
[Guest]: go out to a bunch of angels like me and say, I've got this business. I've got this idea.
[Guest]: Do you want 10 or 20% of it? You need to put two crores down, which means that 35 years
[Guest]: later when that exit took place, he would own 80% of the company, not none of it like
[Guest]: I did. That's a sea change, where it's the idea that's powerful and the money that's
[Guest]: less powerful. So the startup ecosystem has completely flipped the model. The money is
[Guest]: not the constraint any longer. It's the idea and the ability to see the idea through that
[Guest]: becomes the winner.
[Amit Varma]: And just thinking aloud from what you said, that your friend told you, okay, start something
[Amit Varma]: new for me. I have so much money. I won't interfere. And you said, okay. And there was
[Amit Varma]: no idea at that point. There was just the entrepreneurial urge. How common is it for
[Amit Varma]: you to find entrepreneurs who are driven, for example, by this entrepreneurial urge
[Amit Varma]: and the idea comes later? Like, I guess there are two ways of doing it. One is there is
[Amit Varma]: a problem that you want to solve and you have an idea on how to solve it. And then you become
[Guest]: an entrepreneur. I don't know the answer to that question. I mean, because there's always
[Guest]: a selection bias and I'm meeting people who already have an idea to, you know, I'm not
[Guest]: meeting people who say, you know, I want to do something. What should I do? They don't
[Guest]: come to me. They come to me because they know that I'm in the ecosystem. I am willing to
[Amit Varma]: back good ideas or early stage. So they would not tell you that the process of their arriving
[Amit Varma]: at the idea was right. And so you've kind of spoken about how the ecosystem back then
[Amit Varma]: was so different between 81 and now. When did the change start happening? Is this something
[Amit Varma]: that started happening with the dot com boom when there were so many new startups and you
[Amit Varma]: know, the boom happened, much more money floating around? When did the model start to change?
[Guest]: I guess the seed was really planted then. But the momentum is really sort of less than
[Guest]: a decade old. Numbers are not that easily available. But even in the last five years
[Guest]: that I've been part of this ecosystem, what I've seen it mushrooming in terms of the number
[Guest]: of startups that are funded, the number of platforms that exist to promote them, the
[Guest]: number of incubators, the number of angels, all of that, I would say, point zero is really
[Amit Varma]: sort of 2010. That's when this whole thing starts going. And you weren't an entrepreneur
[Amit Varma]: for a long time, you sort of moved on, you did other things, you weren't sort of an informal
[Amit Varma]: entrepreneur in the sense, you started up things that you weren't starting up for money,
[Amit Varma]: like you were very involved in the music scene, you started up teamwork, you know, sense.
[Guest]: Well, you know, yeah, there are different kinds of entrepreneurship, there's social
[Guest]: entrepreneurship. And I think one of the great joys of my life was the fact that I started
[Guest]: working with street children. And in some ways, that's one of the toughest things that
[Guest]: I did, working with street kids. And it was a startup, it was a startup in a very hostile
[Guest]: environment, both physically, and in terms of the establishment, the police, the Juvenile
[Guest]: Justice Act, etc, etc. But we made a lot of headway there, it became a pattern for me,
[Guest]: that I worked on it for four or five years, and then handed it over to other people. It
[Guest]: saw some rebranding, you could call it sort of mergers and acquisitions, without money
[Guest]: being involved. It's now called the Salaam Balak Trust. It works with something like
[Guest]: 5000 kids, has seven residential centers. So, you know, I read somewhere very recently,
[Guest]: and unfortunately, I can't attribute it, which says that entrepreneurship is like a cry to
[Guest]: the environment. I exist, you need to recognize me. And the way you recognize me is for what
[Guest]: I do. I would never have been able to articulate this about myself, because I don't see myself
[Guest]: as being aggressive or needing to prove myself. But there may be something there. But as far
[Guest]: as I'm concerned, it was a need that existed out there. And I was answering that need.
[Guest]: So it was coming from a place of compassion, not from a place of aggression or the need
[Guest]: to prove myself. The other thing that you alluded to, which was working with musicians,
[Guest]: it came from a very funny place, which was that because I'd already started teamwork,
[Guest]: and I also had this background of working in theater, and managing an extremely prolific
[Guest]: theater group, which was the theater action group with Barry John. My sister and her friends
[Guest]: were amateur musicians, good musicians, but amateur. And we arranged this really successful
[Guest]: concert for them. There were 500 people. It was just one of those things that you felt
[Guest]: really good about. And we had a lunch the next day to celebrate. And my sister said
[Guest]: to me very, very woefully, she said, you know, it's such a shame. Because of your ability,
[Guest]: we've had two or three such wonderful concerts. And there are so many really talented full
[Guest]: time musicians out there, and they don't get a platform. And so I said, do something about
[Guest]: it. And she said, it's very easy to say do something about it. I said, then we'll do
[Guest]: something about it. So it literally began as that. So again, it wasn't coming from this
[Guest]: place of, you know, I exist, and therefore, the world must recognize me came from a somewhat
[Guest]: different place, it became from the desire to do something to address a need which you
[Guest]: knew you had the ability. And so Friends of Music was born, it became a very, very successful
[Guest]: movement. A lot of bands, I would say, even if they weren't created by it, they were certainly
[Guest]: formed by it. I know that success has many fathers. So I don't want to claim success
[Guest]: for bands like Indian Ocean or Parikrama or musicians like Mohit Chauhan, but they all
[Guest]: came of age there, had many concerts over there and played a role. And meanwhile, we
[Guest]: also started teamwork, which now is best recognized for the Jaipur Literature Festival, but that's
[Guest]: not why it came about. It came about partly because my partner Sanjoy and I both wanted
[Guest]: to spend more time in theater, specifically, and the performing arts in general, knew that
[Guest]: that couldn't exist with a full time job, a full time corporate job, but also knew that
[Guest]: theater and supporting the arts didn't put money on the table. And therefore, you needed
[Guest]: to find some commercial activity. And so teamwork was born. To do a little bit of work in festivals,
[Guest]: in producing films, we experimented a lot with what would work with us in this broad
[Guest]: media area and so on. So again, it wasn't from this point of, I exist and therefore
[Guest]: I must do something great. So what I'm really saying is that the drive for entrepreneurship
[Guest]: can come from many different places. In our case, and in all the things that I did, it
[Guest]: didn't come from, I can do something, I will do it, it came from, there's an obvious need
[Guest]: over there. And I think I can do something about it. And so I guess what I'm saying is
[Guest]: I'm not the archetypal entrepreneur, who has this driving need to create something to become
[Guest]: rich, to become well known. But I'm an entrepreneur, nevertheless. So there are different kinds,
[Guest]: I think, of entrepreneurs, you can't stab them all with an archetypal description.
[Amit Varma]: KK. No, and that's a very interesting sort of line you quoted, because it would, like
[Amit Varma]: I would typically assume that in any field, entrepreneurship as much as any other, that
[Amit Varma]: sort of self aggrandizement, that need to cry, I exist, would actually be a bug and
[Amit Varma]: not a feature. But in this case, what it seems is that entrepreneurs, if they feel that urge,
[Amit Varma]: are finding a place for themselves in the world by fixing a hole in the universe, in
[Guest]: terms of...
[Guest]: MG That's a very good way of putting it, Amit. It doesn't cover all entrepreneurship, because
[Guest]: I think some entrepreneurs, in fact, the ones who are best known today, actually expand
[Guest]: the universe. They don't just plug a hole, they expand it. Take Elon Musk, for example.
[Guest]: He's expanding the universe. Or certainly he's expanding our definition of the world
[Guest]: we live in. Because, for example, it may not work. You talked about moonshot. He's gone
[Guest]: one step further. He said, I want to have a Mars shot. So the world will include Mars.
[Guest]: May or may not work. But there you are.
[Amit Varma]: You need people to think like that, because that's the only way we actually progress.
[Amit Varma]: I was saving a couple of questions for later. But since we are on the subject of what drives
[Amit Varma]: entrepreneurs and entrepreneurship, I'll sort of ask them now. And my first question there
[Amit Varma]: is, is delusion or being self delusional, a key quality, a necessary quality for an
[Amit Varma]: entrepreneur? Like, for example, I think it's a necessary quality for any artist. Because
[Amit Varma]: when you start out your journey, you are actually very bad at whatever it is you want to spend
[Amit Varma]: the rest of your life doing. And if you knew how bad you were, you would not bother. However,
[Amit Varma]: because you're delusional about your own abilities, you keep doing it. And in a sense, you actually
[Amit Varma]: fake it till you make it. And just by iterating and doing it and learning, you become better
[Amit Varma]: at it. So is it the case that every entrepreneur must be delusional about the differences business
[Amit Varma]: can make?
[Guest]: No, Amit, I don't think so. I don't agree. I have now, you know, I've invested in about
[Guest]: 30 startups. And out of those, I've interacted quite deeply with roughly half of the entrepreneurs.
[Amit Varma]: And
[Amit Varma]: And by quite deeply, of course, you mean you provide mentorship and all?
[Guest]: Not to all of them, but at varying levels. And I wouldn't call any of them delusional.
[Guest]: Though I did mean it in a good way, mind you.
[Guest]: No, no, no, I fully take that. But what I'm saying is that, at least in terms of what
[Guest]: they reveal of their personalities, which I would say is a fair amount. I don't really
[Guest]: find any of them to be overambitious or thinking about 10 years from now. That may be a bug.
[Guest]: Because maybe, I mean, Elon Musk clearly thinks that way. And people talk very extensively
[Guest]: about the reality distortion field that Steve Jobs commanded. So that means that people
[Guest]: interact with him, probably thought that he was delusional. I don't know. But I've never
[Amit Varma]: actually met somebody like that.
[Amit Varma]: And my next question is, is humility a key quality of an entrepreneur? Because on the
[Amit Varma]: one hand, it must seem that if you want to fix a hole in the universe or expand it, so
[Amit Varma]: to say, you must have a lot of self belief. But at the same time, it strikes me that you
[Amit Varma]: also have the ability to learn and adapt and not let short term failure become an ego issue.
[Guest]: And you know, keep learning in that sense.
[Guest]: I think humility is, is key. Knowing what your limitations are, is key. And not so much
[Guest]: for the business itself, as for your own life. Because I think entrepreneurs, qua human beings,
[Guest]: not qua the organizations that they seek to grow, can suffer very badly if they persevere
[Guest]: in something well after it's become obvious, objectively, that it's not going to work.
[Guest]: So I think when we talk about qualities such as humility, we don't look for binary. You
[Guest]: know, you can't say he's humble and he's arrogant. I think you've got to find the right balance.
[Guest]: If you're too humble, and you accept failure too soon, then by definition, you can start
[Guest]: up is going to fold. So you know, I've seen, I've seen two startups and sort of parallel
[Guest]: situations, one in which the entrepreneur folded, all of us who put money into it, exited
[Guest]: with a complete write off. The other, where I think the situation was even more dire,
[Guest]: in terms of cash availability, lack of business, etc, etc. But this young man was absolutely
[Guest]: determined to make a success of it. It seemed almost willful. And yet, the last extra three
[Guest]: months that he asked for, which I finally agreed personally to fund, the rest of the
[Guest]: investors had just mentally written off the money that they'd made. It was just his tenacity
[Guest]: that made me bet the last four and a half lakhs on him, which was a personal loan, you
[Guest]: know, here you go. A lakh of rupees a month to support your salaries and 50,000 rupees
[Guest]: a month for your personal expenditure, three months, and that's it. And three years later,
[Guest]: today, that company has attracted funding from a US impact fund, and is now looking
[Guest]: for VCs to put money into it. Depending on whose figure you believe that company is worth
[Guest]: something like 30 to 40 crores today. And literally three years ago, the bank balance
[Guest]: was 27,000 rupees. So here we're talking, not exactly about the question you asked of
[Amit Varma]: humility. But it also actually pleasing to the self delusional bit that sometimes you
[Amit Varma]: are in such a corner that it would be rational for some to give up. Yeah, but you you just
[Guest]: drive yourself and say no way. So it's, I think one of the most difficult things to
[Guest]: do as an angel investor, somebody who evaluates ideas, companies, founders for whether to
[Guest]: put money down, is to say, this mix of personal characteristics predict a higher rate of success.
[Guest]: It's one needs to do it. But sometimes one gets very surprised. Let's go back to your
[Amit Varma]: sort of journey. Now, it's not as you mentioned in our personal conversations, as if you went
[Amit Varma]: straight from becoming an entrepreneur, and you make a lot of money, and then you decide
[Amit Varma]: to become an investor, your journey's been slightly different from that. Tell me a bit
[Amit Varma]: more about how you came to investing? Like, why did you decide to sort of become an angel
[Guest]: stage investor and mentor? Yeah. So what's missing in between is, is my journey as an
[Guest]: investor in public markets. So that I always dabbled a little bit in stock markets. But
[Guest]: in 2003, and by that time, I was not actively running any of the three businesses that I
[Guest]: helped to start up and which survived. I also invested in a fourth, which went bankrupt.
[Guest]: I wasn't running any of these. I had by then taken a decision not to have an executive
[Guest]: function anywhere. And I had a little bit of money, not a lot. But by then my father
[Guest]: who had a small portfolio, he was a reasonably successful executive. He was into his 80s
[Guest]: and had lost interest. And so I was asked by my mother to clean up his financial affairs.
[Guest]: So I looked at that. I realized that I was getting entranced by the numbers and by my
[Guest]: understanding of both the economy and how companies run. It turned out to also be a
[Guest]: very fortuitous time because 2003 was sort of rock bottom for the Indian stock market
[Guest]: and economy in terms of recovering from the dotcom bust of 2000. And the one thing that
[Guest]: caught my eye as somebody who followed macroeconomics a little bit was that interest rates had never
[Guest]: been so low in the history of independent India as they were in 2003. And I said, we're
[Guest]: now looking at a boom in investing and therefore in equity markets. It turned out to be spot
[Guest]: on because it took a while for that bull market phase to develop steam. But by 2005, it was
[Guest]: full blown. 2007, 2008, of course, we saw it crash. But those were great years to get
[Guest]: into this ecosystem wholeheartedly. And I was managing not the small sum of money that
[Guest]: I had, but also my father's slightly larger sum of money. And despite the crash of 2007,
[Guest]: 2008, which I partly anticipated because of my interest in macroeconomics, the period
[Guest]: 2003 to 2015 was extraordinarily successful for me as an investor in terms of the kind
[Guest]: of returns that I get. You know, that's very objective. There's the amount of money you
[Guest]: had at the beginning, there's what you had at the end, there's the kind of percentage
[Guest]: return you made, this is what the Nifty or any other index did, and you outperformed
[Guest]: it consistently. So this was very objective. But in 2000, and it was actually Diwali 2014,
[Guest]: when I did a cursory kind of review, and I recognized two or three things. The first
[Guest]: is that this is done well. The second is that with a little bit of luck, I now have enough
[Guest]: money that even if I don't manage this portfolio actively, that my needs for the rest of my
[Guest]: life will get taken care of. The third was that you know what, I'm a little bored, because
[Guest]: this almost seems too easy. I was sort of doing it without a lot of passion. There were
[Guest]: sectors I understood, I knew how to invest in them, and so on. But there was also a different
[Guest]: realization, which was that the world was changing. And I started off actually by looking
[Guest]: at sectors which I knew well, and asking myself, am I missing something? And I said that if
[Guest]: I look at the FMCG, the consumer goods sector, which is what I understand best, I can't invest
[Guest]: in the leading confectionery brand in India, because that's Cadbury's, and that's privately
[Guest]: owned by a multinational. I can't invest in the leading soft drinks companies in this
[Guest]: country, Coke and Pepsi, because they're privately owned abroad. I can't invest in the leading
[Guest]: ice cream manufacturer in this country, because it's a cooperative, Amul. I can't at that
[Guest]: time invest in the leading aviation company in the country, Indigo, which was at that
[Guest]: time privately owned. And this came as a bit of a shock to me. But you know, there are
[Guest]: huge sectors of the economy where I can't invest, because of the nature of ownership.
[Guest]: And this suddenly led me to a different allied tangential path of thinking. What about 20
[Guest]: years from now, when I'm approaching 80? Are there similarly going to be huge sectors of
[Guest]: a changing economy, which are close to me? And the answer was obvious. Yes, they are
[Guest]: going to be. Because a whole new sector of the economy, anything which was digital, anything
[Guest]: which had to do with stuff transacted over the telephone, was being funded by a different
[Guest]: ecosystem, an ecosystem of startup funding, startups then getting supplemented by angel
[Guest]: funding, the angels getting supplemented or supplanted by VCs, the VCs getting likewise
[Guest]: supplemented or supplanted by private equity. And if ever those companies came to market,
[Guest]: it would be 20 years down the line or 15 years down the line, by which time they would be
[Guest]: fully priced. Because those would then be half a billion $1 billion companies, well
[Guest]: known brand names, and you wouldn't be able to buy them at a discount. It's more difficult
[Guest]: to make money from businesses which are well recognized and brand leaders than from investing
[Guest]: in businesses before they are well known. This was a very deep realization for me, that
[Guest]: if I want my portfolio to be representative of the world in 2035, when I'm hitting 80,
[Guest]: then I have to do something about it. Now, when I put these two thoughts together, which
[Guest]: is that I have enough money, and therefore I can move to higher risk investments, and
[Guest]: that if I don't do that, I run the risk of omission, which is of not investing.
[Amit Varma]: What millennials would call FOMO, fear of missing out.
[Guest]: Right. So that's when I decided to get into startup investing. And so it was purely an
[Guest]: asset allocation incentive. It had nothing to do with how entrepreneurs fare, the change
[Guest]: in the ecosystem. These are all post-factorializations. But for me, it was driven purely by two things.
[Guest]: One is, I need to get into something new, because I'm a bit bored of what I've been
[Guest]: doing for 12 or 15 years. And secondly, in order for my portfolio to respond to changes
[Guest]: in the economy, I need to understand this ecosystem. And that's why I got in.
[Amit Varma]: And it also strikes me that your money would have more social utility being invested in
[Amit Varma]: startups which are attempting to fix holes in the universe and expand them rather than
[Amit Varma]: existing big companies and so on. Now, I know that's not that wasn't a motivation for you.
[Amit Varma]: But it leads me to my next question about why are startups important?
[Guest]: Well, it was partly a motivation. It was it was in the sense that I'd had this conversation
[Guest]: very, very often with a very dear friend of mine from Delhi School of Economics, who's
[Guest]: more of a socialist than I was. And said, you know, this is like, this is like a fixed
[Guest]: pie. This is a zero sum game. The stock market is zero sum game. What are you doing by investing
[Guest]: in in the stock market? And I know that it's not, you know, it's not a zero sum game. And
[Guest]: if you're selling a stock, you're selling it for a very good reason. I'm buying it.
[Guest]: It's for a very good reason. It's not zero sum, because you're selling it for to meet
[Guest]: your objectives, which are different from mine.
[Amit Varma]: It's a positive sum game. And the economy needs them. I have four listeners who want
[Amit Varma]: to episode length elaboration on this. I had an old episode on the importance of finance
[Amit Varma]: with a good friend, Ajay Shah, which I'll link from the show notes. But yeah.
[Guest]: So nevertheless, even though at a philosophical or intellectual level, I knew that there is
[Guest]: value to being a participant in the listed space. There was a feeling that even if I
[Guest]: end up owning one percent of a startup, probably has a little more social value than investing
[Guest]: point zero one percent in a Hindustan lever or a reliance or whatever. So it was part
[Guest]: of it, but it wasn't a major driver. Having said that, five years later, I look at it
[Guest]: very differently. And I think there's huge social value to investing in startups at many,
[Guest]: many, many levels. So let me try and enunciate it. And it's an enunciation that I've never
[Guest]: done before. So that's the advantage of this kind of conversation. So I think firstly,
[Guest]: it incentivizes pools of capital that may have otherwise not gone into promoting entrepreneurship.
[Guest]: What I'm saying is that when I become sort of the locus around which other investors
[Guest]: participate, I ask myself the question, this five lakhs that this friend of mine is putting
[Guest]: into this company, because I've spent time understanding it and believe that it has a
[Guest]: future. What would that five lakhs have done? I don't think it would have sparked entrepreneurship.
[Guest]: I don't think it would have sparked a new. So I think that is even if you look at it
[Guest]: from the point of view of mobilization of capital, and we work largely in a capitalist
[Guest]: system, it's a new way of mobilizing capital. And without overstating the case, I sometimes
[Guest]: believe that when the history of startup investing gets written and elaborated 40, 50 years from
[Guest]: now, there will actually be people who say that this was as important a development in
[Guest]: the economic system as the joint stock company, as the company with limited liability, because
[Guest]: that also had a very powerful, it became a very powerful engine. It allowed for risk
[Guest]: taking without the risk of bankruptcy or personal bankruptcy. The risk was limited to the capital
[Guest]: that you put in, and it created a whole movement, a mushrooming of entrepreneurship. I think
[Guest]: this is as significant a development. We don't see it yet, but we're beginning to see it.
[Guest]: We see the results of it. We see the dominant companies like Google and Amazon and how exactly.
[Guest]: So Peter Thiel in his book, which I was just reading, says that the 12 leading tech companies
[Guest]: in the world were all funded through this ecosystem of startup and VC. And together
[Guest]: they're worth $2 trillion. That's roughly the size of India's GDP. And I just urge the
[Amit Varma]: listeners to not just think of the sum of money. I mean, $2 trillion is such an abstract
[Guest]: number. I was coming to the fact that when you order food, you do it on Sumatra or Swiggy,
[Amit Varma]: which are funded like that. And like so much in our lives, like everything we do in our
[Amit Varma]: smartphones, everything we do on our laptops, the way we communicate, the way we think,
[Guest]: the way we consume information, everything has changed. It's all changed. So the first
[Guest]: is the mobilisation of capital, you know, as an economist, or in my hat as an economist,
[Guest]: that's one way in which I like to look at it. The second, which is probably even more
[Guest]: significant at a societal level, is the fact that it stimulates entrepreneurship. And people
[Guest]: who couldn't have been entrepreneurs, and this goes back to 1984, when I became an intrapreneur,
[Guest]: not an entrepreneur, who couldn't have been entrepreneurs. And this is the opposite side
[Guest]: of the same thing, the mobilisation of these fresh pools of capital. The young people who
[Guest]: have an idea, now say that there's an ecosystem to tap into, in order to give them a first
[Guest]: stab at making that idea possible. Because the banks are not going to give money to them,
[Guest]: they would never have given it. Because banks work on likelihood of success, they're not
[Guest]: calibrated to look at a very skewed curve.
[Amit Varma]: And even if they recognise a hole in the universe, they will not recognise the possibility of
[Amit Varma]: expanding it.
[Guest]: Correct, correct. But you know, I think it's in the structure of banks, the way they look
[Guest]: at money and so on. They're not geared to high risk. Their governance systems are not
[Guest]: geared to high risk, they're geared to short returns. And that's their mandate. And I'm
[Guest]: not faulting them for it. They're part of a different legacy system of bandaging money.
[Guest]: So I think that's the most powerful, that this incentivises and attracts a whole host
[Guest]: of young people who could not otherwise have considered entrepreneurship. Related to that,
[Guest]: but not entirely directly, and therefore I would map it as a third vector, is the fact
[Guest]: that it encourages people to come up with ideas. And fourthly, which you sort of mentioned
[Guest]: when we began, and again, all of these are interrelated, and yet I think they need to
[Guest]: be listed separately, is that it de-stigmatises failure. Because in an earlier era, 20 or
[Guest]: 30 years ago, a failed entrepreneur was considered a disaster. It's just one more thing, you
[Guest]: know, you did one more thing, it didn't work, and then you're on to the next. In fact, I've
[Guest]: just experienced that at a very personal level. A company I invested in, it folded, it got
[Guest]: bought over at a fairly discounted price from somebody else. I'm to get some money back.
[Guest]: It hasn't yet come, but I already have a deck from that entrepreneur saying, this is my
[Guest]: new enterprise, and will you fund it? Which is both funny, slightly tragic, because hey,
[Guest]: you're already on to something, I haven't even got my money back from what you last
[Guest]: did. But there's no stigma. She's out there with a new idea, and people will back her.
[Amit Varma]: And perhaps it's a feature that you tried and failed because you tried and learned,
[Guest]: you know? I don't think we've yet got there where it's a feature. In Silicon Valley, they
[Guest]: say it's a feature, not a bug. I think we're somewhere in between. It's not yet a feature,
[Amit Varma]: but it's no longer a bug. So I don't know if you know this about me, this predates our
[Amit Varma]: association, but I am a failed entrepreneur twice in the year 2000. Okay, so very briefly,
[Amit Varma]: because our listeners may find it amusing. And it also brings me to my next question,
[Amit Varma]: which is in the year 2000, I got up with the guy who ran MagnaSound at the time,
[Amit Varma]: and one of the senior executives, and I went to them with an idea for digital music.
[Amit Varma]: And the vision I sold them was that CDs, which we now listen to, which we then listen to,
[Amit Varma]: which were then ubiquitous CDs and cassettes, will one day be obsolete, everything will be
[Amit Varma]: digital music. So the idea I came up with was for something we then call Sonic Town,
[Amit Varma]: you can Google it, you will find nothing because this is 2000. And the idea was that we will
[Amit Varma]: get rights of songs from companies, sell them for the equivalent of 50 rupees each, 60 rupees each,
[Amit Varma]: a dollar, and one 10th of a CD at the time, which then cost 500. And also simultaneously,
[Amit Varma]: we will allow bands to make their what would today be called social media pages, profiles,
[Amit Varma]: where people can comment and all that. So a combination of iTunes and MySpace,
[Amit Varma]: one of my partners went to the US spoke to record companies, I think one of the big ones gave us
[Amit Varma]: in principle said, yeah, okay, 70,000 songs, you can take and sell them for this much each
[Amit Varma]: a dollar each. And we were all set up, then we went to New York, we made a presentation to a
[Amit Varma]: room full of venture capitalists. And they were all gung ho about it and said, you are right,
[Amit Varma]: this is a future, you are a visionary. And then the NASDAQ crash happened. So nothing happened,
[Amit Varma]: it completely went timing. And that that brings me to my next question. I won't mention my second
[Amit Varma]: venture just yet, maybe some future episode, which failed within a few months as well.
[Amit Varma]: How important is the role of luck in the success of startups, like we had search engines before
[Amit Varma]: Google, and obviously, they built a better mousetrap, you had social media before Facebook,
[Amit Varma]: and whatever worked with Facebook, as opposed to Orkut or MySpace almost seems to have been
[Amit Varma]: happenstance. You look at Facebook in the early days, it's not as if Zuckerberg had a mission,
[Amit Varma]: it just evolved into something like that. You know, I look at the success of many of these
[Amit Varma]: companies. And it seems that they were just in the right place at the right time, not too early,
[Amit Varma]: not too late, at the right place to have access to the kind of networks and funds. And therefore,
[Amit Varma]: it seems that a lot of companies which have become big, like even the Ubers and OU's of today,
[Amit Varma]: those guys just in a sense not to take away anything from their drive and their enterprise,
[Amit Varma]: but in a sense, they kind of got lucky because similar ideas float around often, you know,
[Guest]: come up at the same time, and I wouldn't attribute that much to luck. I clearly luck or probability
[Guest]: or whatever has a huge role in life. And when I look at my own life, I like to attribute everything
[Guest]: to luck. In that timing is luck. It's very important. But I think what's also important
[Guest]: is your ability as an entrepreneur to listen to what's happening around you. And to respond to
[Guest]: signals, which may be very dim for everybody else at that point in time. But somehow,
[Guest]: you pick out that one signal and say, this is an important signal. And then, in terms of your
[Guest]: interaction with that signal, which is what you do as an entrepreneur, you're able to amplify that
[Guest]: signal and make it more and more and more powerful. That's what you do as an entrepreneur.
[Guest]: And that's clearly not luck. That is, I mean, I don't mean to say it's all luck. Obviously,
[Amit Varma]: it isn't. But at the same time, I think most people in the supplies, not just to entrepreneurs,
[Amit Varma]: but to everyone, underplay the role of luck in their lives, they attribute too much of their
[Amit Varma]: success to their good qualities, and often too much of their failures to themselves,
[Amit Varma]: when I think you should not be so disheartened by failure, or become so arrogant and confident
[Amit Varma]: by success and the role of luck is larger than we but I don't mean to say that luck is everything,
[Guest]: of course. Yeah, I think this is a very long philosophical discussion, not restricted
[Guest]: to the startup space. But as someone who has learned to develop a lot of respect for
[Guest]: young entrepreneurs and not so young ones who are steaming ahead with what they set out to do,
[Guest]: or something different from what they set out to do, but nevertheless successful.
[Amit Varma]: No, and when I say luck playing a part, I also mean bad luck, in which young, thoughtful people
[Amit Varma]: who identify the right idea, and they do all the right things, but it doesn't work out.
[Guest]: You know, I used to think that a lot, certainly about myself,
[Guest]: that I got lucky with many things that I did. But when I look at the young entrepreneurs that I work
[Guest]: with, I like to attribute a lot of what they do not to luck, but just to grit, to intelligence,
[Guest]: to dynamism, to ambition, to extraordinary skill sets of analysis, and enormous amounts of reading
[Guest]: and going out and meeting people, and the determination to make things happen. So,
[Guest]: if the environment around you is not conducive to something, then none of these work.
[Guest]: But having a dipstick for that environment, and whether the idea that you're going to put
[Guest]: is going to flourish there, is that luck? Or is it the discrimination and the ability to gauge
[Guest]: what's going around? It's a bit of both. But I would put more emphasis on your entrepreneurial
[Guest]: instinct to pick out what is going to flourish in that particular soil.
[Amit Varma]: And I guess just thinking aloud, it would actually be rational for you to ignore luck completely,
[Amit Varma]: because you can't control it. You control the controllables, which sort of then brings me to my
[Amit Varma]: next question that when you when you're deciding to fund something, what are your heuristics for
[Amit Varma]: deciding I should do this? Is it the idea? Is it the people? And if it is the people, as I would
[Amit Varma]: imagine it largely is, what are the qualities that you're then looking for?
[Guest]: Yeah. So, clearly it's got to be both. So, the idea is the first screen. And
[Guest]: if I think it's a bad idea, then the meeting is over, right? But you can get the same idea from
[Guest]: five different people. And if we look at mature businesses around us, we've seen that, you know.
[Guest]: In the 80s, I remember counting that there were 500 television manufacturers in India.
[Guest]: Now, there are about five. So, it's clearly not the idea. But yes, the idea has got to have
[Guest]: the potential for success. It should not be an idea that's already seen a lot of
[Guest]: traction in the marketplace. So, you need to be early, as the way I look at it. There's no point
[Guest]: funding the 99th snack food company or the 31st.
[Guest]: But not too early as I was.
[Guest]: Yeah, not too early. But actually, in this space, I think because of the nature of
[Guest]: the beast, I think too early is better than too late. Thirdly, it's got to make some sense to me.
[Guest]: I can say, look, I know that there's a lot of scope for software that improves the functioning
[Guest]: of businesses. But as somebody who's not run a big business or run any business for the last 20, 25
[Guest]: years, I don't know what's happening over there. And you might be the best guy since Oracle or
[Guest]: Microsoft Business, but I'm in no position to gauge. And so, I won't take a call on that.
[Guest]: But that's only the first screen. Then much more important is the founder or founders. And
[Guest]: so, what do I look for there? The first is passion. They've got to really want to do this.
[Guest]: Because unless you're incredibly lucky, so I'm going back on what I'm saying. But you know,
[Guest]: unless everything works right for you, you're going to run into deep shit in the first five
[Guest]: years. And the only thing that enables you to jump that ditch, that shit creek is going to be
[Guest]: your passion. Otherwise, you're going to say, I don't want to get my hands dirty. I've got an MBA
[Guest]: and IIT, I can get a job at 50 lakhs a year, let me go back and do it, you know. And so, the only
[Guest]: guy who's going to say, look, I'm going to try and jump this ditch. And if I don't succeed, I'm
[Guest]: going to fall into it and I'm going to swim through it. So, that guy's got to have passion.
[Guest]: Just sticking with that ditch analogy for a moment. Sometimes actually, you don't need to
[Guest]: jump that ditch. Maybe you can just walk downstream and there's a lovely clear stream on which a boat
[Guest]: is available. So, you do something else which is related. So, I want the person to have passion,
[Guest]: but I also want them not to be too dogged, but also adaptable. And the word we use for startups
[Guest]: is pivot. So, often business have to pivot. They start off in one area, they end up looking at the
[Guest]: same broad business, but from a different perspective. So, can you pivot? Or are you so
[Guest]: determined, this is what I've got to do and I'm going to do this without stopping and scanning
[Guest]: the environment? Perhaps there's a better way of working with the assets that I now have in terms
[Guest]: of my experience of the sector, the people who are working for me, my understanding of it. Maybe
[Guest]: this idea that I had was relevant three years ago when I formulated my business plans, but the
[Guest]: environment has changed and I need to. So, is the entrepreneur willing to pivot? So, are they that
[Guest]: kind of person who's willing to alter their perception of reality because reality has changed
[Guest]: or their earlier perception was not sharp enough? These to some extent you can assess. What I'm
[Guest]: finding increasingly, perhaps it was not part of my metric in terms of evaluating entrepreneurs,
[Guest]: is their ability to A, attract and B, lead a team. And a lot of entrepreneurs are, don't make good
[Guest]: team leaders. So, their own analytical, business, ambition, etc., etc., can do what 50 people can't.
[Guest]: But when they need 100 people, then they need 50 others. And can they hold that team together?
[Guest]: Can they communicate the idea well? Can they build a team spirit, align everybody in the same
[Guest]: direction, not dominate them, allow people to grow, etc., etc., etc.? As a company goes from
[Guest]: startup mode to a company which now has a product, it has traction, you need all of these functions
[Guest]: getting staffed. Do you have the ability to convert this startup into a maturing organization?
[Guest]: These are things that I've now started thinking about because I've seen some of the businesses
[Guest]: that I invested in falling at that level. But now it's a 50 crore business. It's valued at
[Guest]: 300 or 400 crores, but it's not being able to attract and or retain talent. There's always
[Guest]: friction at the system. There are gaps. Money is not the gap. You have the money to hire people,
[Guest]: but you're not being able to get a team together. And I'm realizing that if I don't want to exit a
[Guest]: company in year four or year five, but want to be with it for 7, 8, 10 years, then I need to start
[Guest]: looking for this already at an early stage. Is this person capable of becoming a leader,
[Guest]: which is different from being a good startup entrepreneur?
[Amit Varma]: And given that there's no easy demonstration of that, like you can gauge someone's passion
[Amit Varma]: and you can gauge their doggedness. But if there are two people to begin with, you cannot gauge
[Amit Varma]: their leadership. So have you developed some kind of a radar for it or some sense of...
[Guest]: I haven't. But I think the very fact that I've started thinking about it
[Guest]: and perhaps now we'll look for insights from the businesses that have done well and demonstrated
[Guest]: that ability as against those that haven't and look back at my earlier experiences
[Guest]: in more mature companies. I think that hopefully I'll have a better heuristic
[Guest]: a couple of years down the line. You've got to look for it.
[Amit Varma]: And for you, is integrity a factor in the sense that, you know, will you appreciate that
[Amit Varma]: guy who's being... It's not a factor. It's a binary.
[Guest]: If I have the slightest suspicion that it doesn't exist, you will talk to the person.
[Amit Varma]: And does it reflect in how the person then presents their business plans? Like, for example,
[Amit Varma]: they'll show you projections and if they're bullshitting too much, are you just going to say
[Guest]: no, forget it? Is it part of the... The way I function, I never look at business plans
[Guest]: because at an early stage, those plans are irrelevant.
[Guest]: For someone who's just has this most early stage company is just an idea.
[Guest]: So that person says, you know, by year three, I'll be selling 27,200
[Guest]: whodunits at an average of $1.83 per... That's bullshit.
[Amit Varma]: So I don't even look at it.
[Amit Varma]: But is that a bug? If someone bullshits or will you excuse them and say, okay, that's
[Guest]: part of the pitch that these people have been...
[Guest]: That kind of thing. No, that's... I don't see that as an integrity issue.
[Guest]: It's just become a part of the package.
[Guest]: It's a hygiene thing. You have to do it.
[Guest]: They think they have to do it. I never look at it.
[Guest]: And I make it clear, I'm not looking at this stuff.
[Guest]: Six, eight months, a year down the line, once money has come in and you're starting to get
[Guest]: traction, now I turn the other way.
[Guest]: I say, you have to have a plan.
[Guest]: And there I'm a firm subscriber to the Lao Tzu, I think it was, who said,
[Guest]: planning is everything, plans are nothing.
[Guest]: So plan doesn't mean anything.
[Guest]: I don't expect that plan to come through for a two year...
[Amit Varma]: But the process of thinking about it clarifies your...
[Guest]: What are the levers that you need to work on?
[Guest]: What is it that you can move around?
[Guest]: Which is an early predictor of what is going to work and what doesn't work?
[Guest]: You've got to arrive at those.
[Guest]: And you can only do it by that mechanism of creating a plan and analyzing what are the
[Guest]: inputs that go into it and what they're going to lead to.
[Guest]: So that's not an integrity issue for me.
[Guest]: But integrity issues can manifest in many different ways.
[Amit Varma]: And might take you by surprise when you can't do anything about it.
[Guest]: They can take you by surprise.
[Guest]: But if you've been in business, you've taken risks all your life, in hiring people, in
[Guest]: people, in signing contracts and buying land and negotiating factories and mergers and
[Guest]: acquisitions.
[Guest]: I think you develop something of a nose for it.
[Guest]: You know, I won't say I never made a mistake in trusting somebody.
[Guest]: But by and large, I believe that by and large people are trustworthy.
[Guest]: But I'll give you one example.
[Guest]: Somebody came to me wanting to work in the, already had some products in the food space.
[Guest]: And there was this energy bar that said 20 grams of protein.
[Guest]: And because I understand food really well, the moment I looked at it, I said, can't be
[Guest]: this bar is not enough to have 20 grams of protein in it.
[Guest]: And so I looked at it carefully and there was an asterisk at the end.
[Guest]: And then to find what the asterisk was signaling to, you had to look at the back of the pack
[Guest]: and it said per 100 grams.
[Guest]: Oh, and the back was?
[Guest]: And the back was like 20 grams, let's say.
[Guest]: So I actually had only four grams of protein in.
[Guest]: As far as I was concerned, that meeting was over.
[Guest]: Now, legally speaking, what he was doing, I don't know whether it was correct or incorrect.
[Guest]: I presume it was correct.
[Guest]: He was not making a false claim in a court of law.
[Guest]: It's not a false claim because he's saying it is per 100 grams.
[Guest]: But the signal to the consumer is wrong.
[Amit Varma]: As far as I'm concerned, that's over.
[Amit Varma]: It's not a lie, but it's misleading.
[Guest]: It's misleading.
[Guest]: It's an intent to mislead.
[Guest]: And as far as I'm concerned, I will not have anything to do with that.
[Amit Varma]: Because if he behaves with his consumer that way, he'll behave with his investor that way.
[Guest]: Whatever, it doesn't matter.
[Guest]: It's all the same thing.
[Guest]: Either you're a person who believes in being honest or you're not.
[Guest]: And it's actually more difficult to be dishonest with the investor than it is with the consumer.
[Guest]: But it doesn't matter to me.
[Guest]: It's a person I won't be able to look in the eye.
[Guest]: I can't look a dishonest person in the eye.
[Guest]: It's a little peculiar, you know, but I actually can't.
[Guest]: Because the owner should be on him to not be.
[Guest]: Yeah, but that's me.
[Guest]: You know, that's me.
[Guest]: It's there's an intimacy in looking into people's eyes and you don't want to be intimate with
[Guest]: somebody who's clearly young.
[Guest]: And he knows this is a willful attempt to mislead.
[Guest]: And often startups are led by two people.
[Guest]: And so I guess somewhere at some subliminal level, I'm also looking for the honesty of
[Guest]: interaction between the two of them and not as an exercise in detective background work,
[Guest]: but just by the nature of who I am and the fact that these are people who's typically
[Guest]: whose parents would be younger than me.
[Guest]: So there is this sort of avuncular sense.
[Guest]: It's a fairly strong drive for me as a human being.
[Guest]: The first thing I do with people is to try and understand where they're coming from,
[Guest]: who they are, understand something about their lives and so on.
[Guest]: And in that, a certain honesty is almost enforced.
[Guest]: You know, when I sit down and talk to you about what life was like as a student or as
[Guest]: your parents son or what you did in your last job or whatever it is, false notes are so
[Guest]: easy to pick up because this is not a canned presentation you're making.
[Guest]: You know, this is not about this deck that you've spent several months over and have
[Guest]: presented to eight other people.
[Guest]: And as I said, I'm not doing it to uncover this.
[Guest]: But when I reflect on the question that you asked me and I look back, I think it is very
[Guest]: easy to pick up false notes if you are a people oriented person.
[Guest]: And if I'm not comfortable talking to that person just at a human level, I have no desire,
[Guest]: I have no need to, right?
[Guest]: Because that 10 or 15 or 20 lakhs that I'm going to invest in this person's business
[Guest]: is not going to make, at the individual level, it's not going to make any difference to my
[Guest]: life.
[Guest]: I don't want to have to meet this person again.
[Guest]: So I think on that score, I've been quite lucky that I've, in fact, it's really interesting.
[Guest]: The only organization where there was a breakdown of issues of integrity and so on and so forth
[Guest]: was between two co-founders.
[Guest]: And I had not met the other guy.
[Guest]: Ah, so you had no way to gauge.
[Guest]: I had no way of gauging it.
[Guest]: And when things came to a head and I had to, I first tried to broker a rapprochement between
[Guest]: them.
[Guest]: It didn't work.
[Guest]: I then tried to, I became the investor director, trying to bring this company back together
[Guest]: on behalf of the others.
[Guest]: When it didn't work, then I tried to divide up work into silos for them.
[Guest]: And that didn't work because they wouldn't speak to each other.
[Guest]: And that meant that I would have to become the de facto managing director, which was
[Guest]: not the intention.
[Guest]: And then they left it to me to decide who would get the business.
[Guest]: And then it was very easy because one person had misrepresented reality.
[Guest]: So, so that's, I mean, I'm them.
[Guest]: I'm not saying that there aren't going to be other cases in the future, but in the last
[Guest]: five years, it's quite telling that the only case where I found that our founder was willfully
[Guest]: misrepresenting was a founder whom I'd never met.
[Amit Varma]: Now, is this a unique ability at judging people or is it sheer good luck?
[Amit Varma]: We'll leave it for others to decide and we'll take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: And after we come back, more insights from your journey into what is the startup ecosystem
[Amit Varma]: like today, and, you know, how does this whole business of investing work after a short commercial
[Amit Varma]: break, if you're listening to the scene in the unseen, it means you like listening to
[Amit Varma]: a
[Amit Varma]: selfish gene by Richard Dawkins.
[Amit Varma]: This is a landmark book of popular science writing that explains how natural selection
[Amit Varma]: functions through the medium of genes.
[Amit Varma]: It's an eye-opening book, and if you're not familiar with the subject, the world
[Amit Varma]: will never look the same after you're done with this.
[Amit Varma]: So do check it out on Storytel, The Selfish Gene by Richard Dawkins.
[Amit Varma]: Download the Storytel app or visit Storytel.com.
[Amit Varma]: Remember that's Storytel with a single L. Storytel.com.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the Seen and the Unseen, I'm chatting with Mohit Satyanand about the startup
[Amit Varma]: ecosystem.
[Amit Varma]: Now, when you decided that, you know, for all the reasons you described, that, okay,
[Amit Varma]: you want to now get into investing in mentoring, which I'll ask you more about later, startups
[Amit Varma]: yourself, what are the specific areas you were looking at, specific problems you wanted
[Amit Varma]: to solve, specific sectors that you thought, I'm familiar with these, so let me look at
[Amit Varma]: these.
[Amit Varma]: How did the whole process begin?
[Amit Varma]: How do you get yourself known to potential entrepreneurs?
[Amit Varma]: Do you also build a network of investors?
[Amit Varma]: What was that whole process like?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So, you know, by nature, I'm not a very systematic person, I tend to take all of life pretty
[Guest]: much on the fly.
[Guest]: But I did start with one thought, which is that as with the arts, if you get into something
[Guest]: new, you've got to pay your dues, which means getting punched badly and making mistakes
[Guest]: and so on and so forth.
[Guest]: And I also realized that by and large, the startup ecosystem is populated by people who
[Guest]: are much younger than me, and at some sort of subconscious level, the realization that
[Guest]: I mustn't let my ego come into this in any which way, you know, and there are people
[Guest]: who've been functioning in this ecosystem for a few years, they know a lot more about
[Guest]: it than I do.
[Guest]: And I shouldn't be that uncle who knows nothing but pretends he knows everything.
[Guest]: So I think for me, that was a very, very important starting point at the level of the self.
[Guest]: And so I tried to find out who were the people operating in the startup ecosystem in Delhi.
[Guest]: And let me get to know them and made it very clear from moment one, I know nothing about
[Guest]: this.
[Guest]: I'm here to learn.
[Guest]: I'm going to ask really naive questions, please educate me, whether it was a 23 year old who
[Guest]: had a startup or a 40 year old who had made investments, it was all from the same starting
[Guest]: point.
[Guest]: I know nothing.
[Guest]: I'm here to learn.
[Guest]: You've referred often to mentoring, this was not part of the plan at all, zero.
[Guest]: It was, I'm going to make investments, those investments are typically going to be 1% of
[Guest]: the equity in a company that doesn't entitle me to a board seat.
[Guest]: These are people working in areas about which I know nothing.
[Guest]: So this was not even part of the plan.
[Guest]: By definition from where we began, I was looking at investing in areas which are the future
[Guest]: of the economy.
[Guest]: And therefore, the starting point is I don't know anything about them.
[Guest]: And therefore, let me not restrict what I get into, I'm willing to invest in anything.
[Guest]: I learn along the way.
[Guest]: So one thing that I've always had immodesty about is my ability to learn.
[Guest]: My willingness and my ability to learn.
[Guest]: I learn something, it'll be above the median.
[Guest]: And you know, there's this very simplistic maxim in investing, which is that you don't
[Guest]: have to be right 100% of the time, as long as you're right 51% of the time, you'll make
[Guest]: money on average.
[Amit Varma]: So...
[Amit Varma]: Or even if you're right 1% of the time, and you get more than a hundredfold.
[Guest]: My point only was that, you know, I think that I'll be able to learn enough about this
[Guest]: ecosystem in a couple of years, that I won't fund those 15 businesses out of every 20,
[Guest]: which don't make money.
[Guest]: I'd have at least one or two out of the five that make a lot of money.
[Guest]: And along the way, I'm going to make these mistakes, I'm going to lose money.
[Guest]: I'm not...
[Guest]: I actually went into it without thinking too hard.
[Guest]: So what I did, and this was very important from a numbers point of view, because if there's
[Guest]: anybody listening to it, who's listening to this podcast from the viewpoint of, hey, can
[Guest]: I get into this ecosystem too?
[Guest]: I think it's important to look at the numbers.
[Guest]: And so what I said was that I am going to put between 5 and 10% of my total financial
[Guest]: net worth into this ecosystem, not more.
[Guest]: And because even if I make a complete loss on all of this money, it's not going to affect
[Guest]: my retirement plans.
[Guest]: And number two, that I'm going to divide this into 20 startups, because you can't predict
[Guest]: whether the startup that you put money in is going to be one of those which becomes
[Guest]: 100x, becomes a Google or whatever it is.
[Guest]: And so you've got to spread the odds.
[Guest]: And statistics tells us that small samples, anything below 30 is a small sample.
[Guest]: The way I worked the numbers, 30 didn't... 30 seemed too ambitious, both in terms of
[Guest]: money as well as in terms of two years of investing, I thought that was too much.
[Guest]: So I kept it at 20.
[Guest]: And I was well prepared for the fact that the bulk of those 20 would take place in year
[Guest]: two, because it would take me a year to understand the whole ecosystem and so on.
[Guest]: And I took one shortcut along the way, which was that I aligned myself with an informal
[Guest]: network, a couple of guys who are much younger than me, but I liked them.
[Guest]: They were smart.
[Guest]: They'd already made a few investments.
[Guest]: So there were certain theses that I could sort of bounce my thoughts of, learn from,
[Guest]: et cetera, et cetera.
[Guest]: They were already plugged into the system.
[Guest]: They were getting what in the ecosystem is called deal flow, which means that young people
[Guest]: were sending decks to them and saying, will you fund this?
[Guest]: So to start with, I was riding this deal flow.
[Guest]: Because the system was growing so rapidly, and there are always a hundred potential startups
[Guest]: for every angel investor, word gets around very fast, and the external ecosystem, let's
[Guest]: say LinkedIn, Facebook, Twitter, they all feed into this.
[Guest]: So the moment I'd funded two or three startups riding piggyback on this, the word is out
[Guest]: there.
[Guest]: I'm not putting the word out there.
[Guest]: The social media system is putting the word out there that this is a guy who's investing.
[Guest]: And then because I carry those labels somewhere, people dig those labels out.
[Guest]: They're not on my Twitter handle, they're not on my Facebook, but people want to ferret
[Guest]: them out.
[Guest]: And they say that this is a guy who built a successful snack food brand.
[Guest]: This is a guy who founded a company which now runs the Jaipur Literature Festival.
[Guest]: So these tags were associated.
[Guest]: And so the deal flow started, people started coming.
[Guest]: I started at one stage when I was really active.
[Guest]: And before the system got a little more formalized, and I'll explain that a little bit, I was
[Guest]: getting between 20 and 30 decks every week.
[Guest]: So because the whole startup ecosystem was, in a sense, very early then, it was growing
[Guest]: extraordinarily rapidly, 2015, 16, 17, I was at an inflection point.
[Guest]: And so it became like this tsunami.
[Guest]: Getting deal flow was the least of my problems.
[Amit Varma]: But filtering from them, that's your personal choice.
[Guest]: And what I also learned very rapidly is, I think this is part of every journey.
[Guest]: So these two guys on whom I wrote piggyback in the early stages, and the first five deals
[Guest]: I did, three or four were with them.
[Guest]: And I think I imbued them with a lot more savvy and qualities than they had.
[Guest]: I'm not downplaying what they have, but I gradually learned that they do have their
[Guest]: shortcomings.
[Guest]: Their hits and misses are the same as anybody else's, and therefore I mustn't blindly
[Guest]: follow them.
[Guest]: I have to also now start exercising my own judgment.
[Guest]: And so I started picking only one in five or ten that they sent to me.
[Guest]: The second thing that started happening, and which has shaped my participation in this
[Guest]: ecosystem hugely, is that in that interaction that I would have with young entrepreneurs,
[Guest]: which is only from the point of view of my having to decide whether to invest in them
[Guest]: and their idea or not, that some of them would say, you know, we really enjoyed meeting you.
[Guest]: When we come back again, I would say, yeah.
[Guest]: And so it's they who thrust mentorship on me rather than the other way around.
[Guest]: And even now, when people come to me and ask me to invest in them, I make it very clear
[Guest]: to them that my investment doesn't carry any conditionalities on it.
[Guest]: If I make that investment call, I'm making it.
[Guest]: I'm not saying I need a board seat, I'm not saying I need to be an advisor, I'm not saying
[Guest]: I need to be a mentor.
[Guest]: Yes, I would like to be kept informed, but that's standard hygiene.
[Guest]: That you must do in any case.
[Guest]: And ironically then, that role of mentorship, which was thrust upon me, which was not part
[Guest]: of my design, has in some senses become for me, the defining and the most valuable feature
[Guest]: of being part of this ecosystem that was purely accidental.
[Amit Varma]: And when you say valuable and defining, you mean also for yourself, not just for the people
[Guest]: you're mentoring.
[Guest]: I'm talking only about myself.
[Guest]: That's for them to come on a podcast and tell you how much it meant to them.
[Guest]: But defining for me, because at several levels.
[Guest]: The first level is that that ongoing interaction helps you to understand the whole process
[Guest]: of building a new business afresh.
[Guest]: These were things that I did 20 and 30 and 40 years ago.
[Guest]: And I'll never be, I'll never do it again.
[Guest]: And the entire environment in which they function is completely different from what it was in
[Guest]: the 80s and 90s.
[Amit Varma]: And so in a sense, you're being forced to put yourself in the brain of the entrepreneur.
[Guest]: Yeah, I'm in a different environment, in a different ecosystem.
[Guest]: So I'm learning in a way that I would never otherwise have been able to learn if I was
[Amit Varma]: just learning entrepreneurship without actually being an entrepreneur.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So that's extraordinarily valuable, but that's at the meta level.
[Guest]: The second thing is that I am learning about a whole new range of businesses, operating
[Guest]: factors within that business, which I wouldn't have understood as well if I was just an investor.
[Guest]: I would just see the quarterly numbers or the annual numbers, but not really what went
[Guest]: inside them.
[Guest]: So it's enriching my understanding of business.
[Guest]: Thirdly, very valuable, is building very, very, very deep relationships with young people.
[Guest]: Because otherwise we all tend to, at least in my generation, all our relationships tend
[Guest]: to be with people of the same age, the same social background as you went to.
[Guest]: And I see that when I go to parties with people I grew up with.
[Guest]: Parties within two or three years of each other, they all went to the same schools and
[Guest]: colleges.
[Amit Varma]: They all did more or less the same thing.
[Amit Varma]: And in your case, because you're active in theater and all that, you are in any case
[Amit Varma]: with young people all the time.
[Guest]: Yeah, but now I'm interacting with, and this is where the social fabric has changed hugely.
[Guest]: None of my friends from the 60s, 70s, 80s, 90s, etc. are people who grew up in small
[Guest]: towns.
[Guest]: They're all people who grew up in Delhi, or Bombay, or Calcutta, or Chennai, maybe Pune,
[Guest]: like you.
[Guest]: But today, if I look at the social, at the entrepreneurs I work with, somebody grew up
[Guest]: in Dhanbad, and somebody grew up in Agra, and somebody grew up in an Air Force station
[Guest]: in Jaipur, etc., etc., etc.
[Guest]: And I'm being able to develop relationships with these people, which are not just business
[Guest]: relationships, because that's not the way I work or live.
[Guest]: The relationships become very, very rich ones.
[Guest]: So I've developed incredible relations with these people.
[Guest]: Not only at an instrumental level, what it's also doing gradually, and as I said, I've
[Guest]: not developed those heuristics at a formal level, but what it's also gradually doing
[Guest]: me, doing is informing my understanding of what it takes to actually be a successful
[Guest]: operational entrepreneur.
[Guest]: And to go back to the question you earlier asked, it's somewhere building up that profile
[Guest]: of what is it that is going to make this person able to successfully create a business out
[Guest]: of this idea.
[Guest]: And that comes from working with them on a weekly, monthly, quarterly basis.
[Guest]: And lastly, you know, that very, very amorphous sense of giving back, you know, that because
[Guest]: of my experience as a business person, not the most extraordinarily successful one, but
[Guest]: despite that, you know, I'm not a Bill Gates or Nandan Malikani or whatever, but despite
[Guest]: that, I, besides them, I can actually see the value of the time that I'm spending with
[Guest]: them come back.
[Guest]: And I can literally see this is what I've put into the business.
[Guest]: And this is what it's resulting in.
[Guest]: So there is that element of giving back, but as I said, I don't want to overstress that,
[Guest]: because the other rewards are very substantial in any case.
[Amit Varma]: And I would then guess that your mentorship doesn't, like, what form does it take?
[Amit Varma]: For example, I would guess it's not in the form of micro things like this is a specific
[Amit Varma]: problem we have, what should we do, where you might choose to sort of take a backseat
[Amit Varma]: because you know the environment as little as them or less than them.
[Amit Varma]: But it would be more in the form of here is how you think about this situation, or, you
[Guest]: know, how does that work?
[Guest]: It can be anything.
[Guest]: So, you know, I think it needs to work within a structure, as all organizations do.
[Guest]: And that's something that I'm very particular about.
[Guest]: There needs to be a framework within which this relationship functions.
[Guest]: That's the absolute base minimum, which means that there's got to be a monthly meeting.
[Guest]: And that monthly meeting has got to have an agenda.
[Guest]: And there's got to be certain minimum numbers and points to be covered.
[Guest]: That's like a base point.
[Guest]: But if it stops at that, then it's not really mentorship.
[Guest]: The mentorship happens when, and as I said, I don't force it.
[Guest]: It happens when somebody rings you up and says, you know, I need to come and see you,
[Guest]: I'm having a problem with this particular employee, or I'm not being able to see how
[Guest]: we need to rethink our brand strategy, or how aggressively should we spend the money
[Guest]: that came in in the last round?
[Guest]: Or you know, this is what a potential customer is asking for.
[Guest]: It means are dropping our price to our other customer, compared to other customers by 25%.
[Guest]: Should we do it?
[Guest]: What is the impact of this going to be on our overall pricing structure?
[Guest]: These are questions that are easier to answer when you've faced similar issues 20 times
[Guest]: in the past, you know, and sometimes it can get as detailed and as specific as you've
[Guest]: said, you know, but that's not structured.
[Guest]: What I always tell people is, throw as much as you want to at me, unlikely that it's going
[Guest]: to be so much that I'll say, hey, this is too much.
[Guest]: A lot of it happens by happenstance, you know, I've gone into an office for a meeting, there
[Guest]: are five packs on the table, and I just pick it up, and I'm looking at it.
[Guest]: It's not part of my role or the way the interaction is structured for me to say, hey, you need
[Guest]: to send every product label to me.
[Guest]: That's creating too much load on me.
[Guest]: But I pick it up and I say, you know what, this is simply not aesthetic.
[Guest]: And how is the product design ecosystem working?
[Guest]: Who's doing it?
[Guest]: Who's overseeing it?
[Guest]: What is the nature of the designer?
[Guest]: And then saying, this is not going to work.
[Guest]: This can't be done internally.
[Guest]: You need a design shop to do it.
[Guest]: And you need to look at their track record and you, perhaps if you want to send me a
[Guest]: link to the work they do and let me take a call on whether I think their quality is good
[Guest]: enough or not.
[Guest]: So I think it's a willingness to engage with everything and yet not to demand that everything
[Guest]: clears you.
[Guest]: So there's a little bit of, there's a little bit of happenstance in it.
[Guest]: There's a lot of randomness to it, but what happens if you engage frequently with not
[Guest]: just the entrepreneur, but then as time goes on with the larger team is as in any relationship
[Guest]: that you pick up cues really fast.
[Guest]: Your ability to pick up cues about what I'm saying and thinking much higher than you have
[Guest]: with the person you met for the first time because of the depth of our engagement.
[Guest]: And if you are having a problem and you bounce it off me, my ability to find the appropriate
[Guest]: response because there's no objective best response in most situations.
[Guest]: The response is the appropriate one, appropriate to you as a person, the other people and or
[Guest]: institutions involved in that is what makes it appropriate.
[Guest]: Now, my ability to find that is conditional or determined not just by my intellect or
[Guest]: experience, but also by my understanding of you.
[Guest]: And that comes from the time and the trust and the intimacy with which we work together.
[Amit Varma]: Can you illustrate that difference between an objective response and an appropriate response?
[Guest]: Sure.
[Guest]: So how aggressively should you grow a business?
[Guest]: There's no appropriate response to it.
[Guest]: I mean, there's no objective response to it.
[Guest]: You can say that, you know, there's a lot of competition coming in.
[Guest]: And therefore we have to grow extremely rapidly.
[Guest]: But the appropriate response depends on your team.
[Guest]: How prepared are they for a phase of rapid growth?
[Guest]: How much stress can you handle?
[Guest]: Can you work 18 hour days or not?
[Guest]: Some people can, some people can't.
[Guest]: Can you handle stress?
[Guest]: So in the same situation, I might give a different answer to two entrepreneurs.
[Amit Varma]: Makes sense.
[Amit Varma]: Moving on, let's, let's talk about, and again, I'll ask a very layman question here, because
[Amit Varma]: my knowledge of this is sort of very old.
[Amit Varma]: As the startup ecosystem has evolved and where it is today, what are sort of the different
[Amit Varma]: stages of startup funding?
[Amit Varma]: Like you are an angel investor, you're taking the initial idea and, you know, you're trying
[Amit Varma]: to grow that from scratch.
[Amit Varma]: What are the different stages of startup funding?
[Amit Varma]: How do those different stages interact with each other?
[Amit Varma]: How do those different stages influence each other?
[Amit Varma]: Like how many angel investors are investing to actually grow a profitable business and
[Amit Varma]: how many of them are just looking at an exit down the line?
[Guest]: How does all of that work?
[Guest]: Yeah, we could spend a few episodes on this, but to put it very simply, the first stage
[Guest]: is what we call family and friends.
[Guest]: So you know, you have an idea and you want to play with it and you, you take your savings
[Guest]: and perhaps some money from your dad or your brother or whatever it is, and you sort of
[Guest]: play around with this and maybe have a prototype of your product or service out in the market
[Guest]: and start refining your understanding of what it is that you want to do and is there a market
[Guest]: out there and so on.
[Guest]: So this is sort of the family and friends stage and broad ballpark, you would have invested
[Guest]: between 10 lakhs and a crore at this stage.
[Guest]: A crore is really the extreme, typically less than 50 lakhs and now you feel convinced enough
[Guest]: that I can, there's enough meat over here for me to take this to an angel investor or
[Guest]: group of angel investors and I now need a crore or two to grow this business.
[Guest]: The median is now actually in the last four or five years, I've seen this whole ecosystem
[Guest]: becoming almost formulaic.
[Guest]: So you know, the medians are quite well defined.
[Guest]: So when you now bring this to the level of angel or seed funding, that's already the
[Guest]: second stage and you would typically look at raising between one and a half and four
[Guest]: to five crores.
[Guest]: The median number would be two, two and a half crores at this stage and at each stage
[Guest]: you typically dilute your shareholding or then the cumulative shareholding by 20%.
[Guest]: So that means that you're saying, in effect, I want you guys to put two crores in, meaning
[Guest]: a bunch of angels and at the end of that you will have 20%.
[Amit Varma]: So you're valuing the company at 10 crores.
[Guest]: Correct.
[Guest]: So valuing the company at 10 crores, let's say you raise two and a half crores, the company
[Guest]: is now 12 and a half crores, you have 80%, the angels have 20%.
[Guest]: The next is what would be called the A-series, which is when the first bunch of institutional
[Guest]: investors come in.
[Guest]: There could be something in between, which we would call it pre-series A, but then you
[Guest]: have the A-series.
[Guest]: At the A-series, median would be 80 to 100 crores valuation for the company.
[Amit Varma]: It could be lower, but you know, as a median number.
[Amit Varma]: So if you give away 20%, you're getting about 20 crores.
[Guest]: Absolutely right, absolutely right.
[Guest]: Now what happens to the angel investors at this stage?
[Guest]: At this stage, it's, it can go either way, one, it can go one of three ways.
[Guest]: And none of them are mutually exclusive.
[Guest]: You can have a situation where the angel investors get an option to put more money into the business
[Guest]: to either protect themselves from dilution or actually increase their share.
[Guest]: That's becoming increasingly rare, actually, but that option does sometimes exist.
[Guest]: The second is that the status quo for the angels.
[Guest]: So they get diluted by a little bit, but they don't mind.
[Guest]: And the VCs who come in the early stage, they're still early stage by their definition.
[Guest]: They come in and they put 20 crores in and they give the option to some angels to exit.
[Guest]: And typically when they do that, that's at a discount to the price at which they're investing.
[Guest]: Because they say our primary function is to provide growth capital to the company, not
[Guest]: to give an exit to somebody else.
[Guest]: So if we are valuing the company at a hundred crores, you want to exit, we will value your
[Guest]: shares at 80 crores.
[Guest]: So you exit.
[Guest]: What they're sometimes a little more accepting about is the startup guy taking some money
[Guest]: out.
[Guest]: Because by now he's spent four or five years growing the business.
[Guest]: He's typically taken away a lower salary than he would at that level if he was working for
[Guest]: someone else.
[Guest]: So this is time for him to take a little nest egg out, a crore or two crores, which is okay
[Guest]: if the company is now valued at a hundred crores, for him to say, you know, I have 60%
[Guest]: of the company, which is now valued at 60 crores.
[Guest]: Can I take five crores out of the company?
[Amit Varma]: It's quite normal.
[Amit Varma]: But what that would mean for the investor is that it's five crores less actually going
[Amit Varma]: into the company's fund.
[Guest]: They see it as a different, you know, they find a different pocket to take the money
[Guest]: out of.
[Guest]: So it's not a big deal.
[Guest]: So my interaction with the ecosystem really stops there at a series A.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Guest]: So these are the three options.
[Amit Varma]: You can invest further.
[Amit Varma]: You can sell out.
[Amit Varma]: Which is called a re-up.
[Unknown]: So you just protect yourself.
[Unknown]: You can re-up, you can exit, or you can stay put.
[Amit Varma]: And staying put would mean if you have 20% of the company, you lose 20% of that.
[Guest]: Correct.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: As a group.
[Guest]: So let's stay with this for a while because the other question is that you asked was how
[Guest]: many angel investors, you know, so typically again, just to stay with the number, typically
[Guest]: there'll be 20 angels.
[Guest]: So that two crores or two and a half crores would be divided among 20 people.
[Guest]: It wouldn't be even, it's not like everybody's put in 10 lakhs.
[Guest]: It would range typically from today it's more or less uniformly a minimum ticket is five
[Guest]: lakhs.
[Guest]: There's no maximum.
[Guest]: Typically what happens is, is there's one large investor who's a lead investor.
[Guest]: Who's put 20 to 50 lakhs in.
[Guest]: It's also not necessary that the largest investor is the lead investor because what's beginning
[Guest]: to happen is that there are some people who are getting sort of tagged as good lead investors
[Guest]: who are willing to play an active role, who have put some effort into interacting with
[Guest]: the entrepreneur, ascertaining that he's a good bet, willing to answer questions that
[Guest]: have some sort of brand attached to them.
[Guest]: So that person may actually be the second largest investor as has happened to me in
[Guest]: a couple of cases where somebody else has put 40 or 50 lakhs in and said, but I don't
[Guest]: want to be the lead investor.
[Guest]: I've said, okay, I'm willing to put 20 lakhs in and I'm willing to be a lead investor.
[Guest]: So broad numbers, five to 10 lakhs each, 2025 angel investors to two and a half crores,
[Guest]: 10 crore valuation.
[Guest]: Next round you're talking about between 50 and 100 crores and you've still got 20 investors,
[Guest]: maybe four or five less because the company offers, the VCs offer an out, not everybody
[Guest]: takes it because a lot of people believe, rightly so, that in the last two years since
[Guest]: we invested here, we've seen two or three other companies that we've invested in go
[Guest]: to zero.
[Guest]: So let's ride the winning bets and not exit them rather than exiting the winning bets.
[Guest]: So that's fine.
[Guest]: By the time it comes to the series B, you can rule out the first option as an angel
[Guest]: investor, which is of investing more.
[Guest]: A, the ticket size are too large, B, by now the institutional investors want to clean
[Guest]: up the capital table.
[Guest]: So you will get an exit.
[Guest]: Odds are you'll get an exit, but certainly the first option doesn't exist of re-upping.
[Amit Varma]: So it's only one of two options.
[Amit Varma]: And what does the median size go to now?
[Amit Varma]: We've gone from 10 crores to 100 crores in series A.
[Amit Varma]: 200 plus.
[Amit Varma]: 200, 250.
[Guest]: Yeah, 200, 250.
[Guest]: And by now the nature of the VCs is also beginning to change.
[Guest]: You're looking at bigger players, a lot of them foreign rather than domestic.
[Guest]: And the size of checks is now not really in crores of rupees, but in millions of dollars.
[Guest]: So now you're talking 5 million, 10 million size of checks coming into the ecosystem.
[Guest]: I think that by and large, the risk reward ratio is not changing because the odds that
[Guest]: this company, which has grown 20x in the last 4 or 5 years, to grow again 20x is very low.
[Guest]: And for someone like me who's entering into this to get into a very early stage of risk
[Guest]: reward, that's then catering to a different part of my risk reward portfolio.
[Guest]: I need then, at that stage, to reconsider this investment, not as being part of my seed
[Guest]: investment.
[Guest]: It's in a different pocket.
[Guest]: It's a more mature investment.
[Guest]: So unless I'm really involved with the business, really convinced about it, I've known it from
[Guest]: inside, I think from a purely risk reward ratio, by then it's time for me to get out.
[Guest]: I have seen a couple of BNC investments where for some reason the entering capital didn't
[Guest]: make that offer.
[Guest]: So I'm still in there.
[Guest]: But by the time you then get to larger VCs and then finally you go to PE players, that's
[Guest]: a part of the ecosystem that I don't have much personal knowledge of, I know it more
[Amit Varma]: from the outside.
[Amit Varma]: But how many rounds are there?
[Amit Varma]: We've reached A, B, you said would be 200 crores plus.
[Amit Varma]: What is C?
[Amit Varma]: What is D?
[Guest]: Where does this go?
[Guest]: Well, you go, you know, if the company keeps growing and you end up like a flip card with
[Guest]: the valuation of 18 billion and 1 billion coming in, that's probably series H by then.
[Guest]: It's academic as far as I'm concerned.
[Amit Varma]: And on the other hand, how much of, you know, what is now happening with all these different
[Amit Varma]: series funds?
[Amit Varma]: Like, you know, there are two motivations for investing in the stock market.
[Amit Varma]: One is you look for value and you try to make money and you look at the fundamentals of
[Amit Varma]: companies and so on.
[Amit Varma]: The other is you write the sentiment and you look for the greater fool.
[Amit Varma]: You know, you're not necessarily looking for inherent value in the business per se.
[Amit Varma]: What you're looking at is, that's the stock market, but that's the stock market.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Amit Varma]: And does a similar sort of logic invest in the venture fund, for example, in the case
[Amit Varma]: that as an early stage investor, and I'm not talking about you per se, but in general,
[Amit Varma]: would there be motivations for people to say that, to invest in areas which are hot because
[Amit Varma]: they know that, for example, series A, series B will happen?
[Guest]: There is fashion wherever there are humans, there's fashion.
[Guest]: Whether it's in theater or cinema or clothes or music, whatever, there's fashion, there
[Guest]: are trends.
[Guest]: People are going to ride those trends.
[Guest]: There is what you talked about earlier, FOMO, and I think we all have it.
[Guest]: Anybody who's been in the investment space does have FOMO.
[Guest]: It's very difficult to be completely objective about yourself, but I think if anything else
[Guest]: I tend to veer in the opposite direction, which is the moment something starts getting
[Guest]: popular, I want to get out of it.
[Guest]: It's just, it's something very hardwired.
[Amit Varma]: Are you unusual in that regard?
[Amit Varma]: Possibly.
[Amit Varma]: Because are there many more, to use Chuck Prince's phrase, are there many more people
[Guest]: who are dancing while the music plays?
[Guest]: Yeah, yeah, sure, sure, sure, sure, sure, that's true.
[Guest]: But I think that if you compare the startup space to the stock market space, the percentage
[Guest]: is much lower.
[Guest]: Because unlike the stock markets where there are many more intermediaries and the bulk
[Guest]: of people are investing through mutual funds, advisors, ULIPS, et cetera, et cetera, because
[Guest]: they doubt their own ability to write those checks, the startup space is populated by
[Guest]: people who are writing their own checks.
[Guest]: And they're also typically people who have more intimate understanding of business.
[Guest]: The average person has functioned at a fairly responsible level for 10 or 15 years.
[Guest]: So the nature of the people who write checks into the startup space is different.
[Guest]: They have deeper understanding.
[Guest]: Yes, there are trends, you know.
[Guest]: So e-commerce was a trend, and then fintech was a trend, and then foodtech was a trend.
[Guest]: And whenever something starts trending, then you have very high failure rates.
[Guest]: So you have to be aware of that and stay away from entering trends before they become.
[Amit Varma]: High failure rates because many people then get attracted to the trend and many more people
[Amit Varma]: come in.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, Durgeon's law applies here.
[Amit Varma]: So you tell me, you're functioning in a particular regulatory environment.
[Amit Varma]: What role does the Indian state play in this?
[Amit Varma]: Like, you know, would the regulatory environment be a factor for you that should I invest in
[Amit Varma]: this company or not?
[Amit Varma]: First, let's see what sector is it in.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, clearly.
[Guest]: Clearly.
[Guest]: First, I want to make the statement that one of the things that's really attractive about
[Guest]: the startup space is that a lot of them enter into space where there is no regulatory environment.
[Guest]: Because it's so new.
[Guest]: So you look at e-commerce.
[Guest]: They're now trying to create a regulatory environment.
[Guest]: There wasn't a regulatory environment, and that's fantastic.
[Guest]: Now if you look at EdTech, which is an area where I desperately want to make good investments.
[Guest]: Because that's one area where I can actually say that my desire to invest over there is
[Guest]: driven by the dismal state of education in our country and not just by the desire for
[Guest]: a return.
[Guest]: The two, of course, do and should converge.
[Guest]: But there I can say that I want to invest there because I think that the existing educational
[Guest]: system is completely broken.
[Guest]: The extensive rules that we've talked about often in our personal conversations and in
[Guest]: writing that both of us have done about the maze of regulations that governs the education
[Guest]: system.
[Guest]: It doesn't exist out there in EdTech.
[Guest]: And therefore, it's a great place to experiment in.
[Guest]: But on the other side, somebody came to me with a proposal for investing in drones.
[Guest]: I think drones are fantastic because I could already see 20 ways in which they would be
[Guest]: useful to us as individuals and to society, whether it's mapping of lands or it's delivery
[Guest]: of medicines or entertainment or shooting weddings from a different area or perspective.
[Amit Varma]: You can think of 20 uses.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, at dinner last night, your friend VK Madhavan was telling us about how the government
[Amit Varma]: of Odisha use drones to map exactly who stays where in a particular slum colony.
[Guest]: So they can then assign services and even in some cases, property rights accordingly,
[Guest]: which is so mind blowing.
[Guest]: Yeah, it's mind blowing.
[Guest]: But I also saw that there would be an entire welter of regulatory issues that these guys
[Guest]: would have to deal with.
[Guest]: And therefore, as a business, you would get into times when you're burning capital just
[Guest]: to survive while you can't move forward because there's a file sitting on somebody's desk
[Guest]: in the Director General of Civil Aviation.
[Guest]: And so though I saw that this is a very promising area to get into, I didn't want to get into
[Guest]: an area where the regulation is not clear, but it is going to apply.
[Guest]: You can have an area where there is no regulation, but it's not important enough for the government
[Guest]: to create regulation in a hurry.
[Guest]: But in drones, it was just my sense that this is immediately an area on which the government
[Amit Varma]: is going to clamp down.
[Amit Varma]: So it's not just what the quality of the idea or the services, it's also what environment
[Amit Varma]: will it function in.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: So regulation is certainly something that you need to keep in mind when you look at
[Guest]: anything in any nation, and certainly in India, where the ability to create fresh regulation
[Guest]: is both extremely dilatory, extremely unpredictable, and inevitably very constricting.
[Guest]: So if I see that's going to be an issue, I'm sorry, I'm not interested.
[Amit Varma]: And how has the startup ecosystem changed in the last five years, not just in terms
[Amit Varma]: of the ecosystem itself growing in its own way as it is, but also in terms of interactions
[Amit Varma]: with the state?
[Amit Varma]: For example, you had that sort of an issue where I think investments by angel investors
[Guest]: were going to be taxed.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: That's something that I have some experience of.
[Guest]: So firstly, the ecosystem has grown massively in terms of numbers.
[Guest]: Secondly, I don't know the numbers because we as a nation are not very good in terms
[Guest]: of tracking statistics, whether it be GDP or the number of toilets that were actually
[Guest]: built under Swachh Bharat, or the number of startups, but it's grown enormously.
[Guest]: And I think there's worldwide agreement on the fact that ours is the third largest startup
[Guest]: ecosystem in the world, behind the US and China.
[Guest]: And that's extraordinary.
[Guest]: That's absolutely extraordinary.
[Guest]: It's also grown in the sense that now there are people looking to service different parts
[Guest]: of that ecosystem, which is always a good symptom.
[Guest]: So there, for example, I had a meeting yesterday with a young man who is a charter accountant
[Guest]: and a CFA and wants to tailor the services that he offers only to startups.
[Guest]: That means that here's the assessment of somebody that this ecosystem is large enough for specialists
[Amit Varma]: and finance companies.
[Amit Varma]: And this is a revealed preference, it's not signalling.
[Guest]: Absolutely right, absolutely right.
[Guest]: Every month or so, I meet somebody who wants to become an incubator or somebody who does
[Guest]: early grooming and a hygiene check for startups and prepares them for the stage where they
[Guest]: come to an angel investor like me.
[Guest]: The third sign is, which is something that I'm fairly engaged with, is platforms, formalized
[Guest]: platforms where, for example, one of the companies that I'm currently in the process of helping
[Guest]: to raise funds as the lead investor.
[Guest]: So their fundraise, or raise as it's called, is now live on a platform.
[Guest]: And so the way it's working is that I've done, you know, I've had a couple of interactions
[Guest]: with this person.
[Guest]: I've liked the product.
[Guest]: I've liked the guy.
[Guest]: I've liked the deck.
[Guest]: I've tried to understand the market.
[Guest]: And now it's on a platform.
[Guest]: And that platform is a fairly organized company, which itself has investors behind it.
[Guest]: So you can see how rich it's already.
[Guest]: So there's a company which has been financed by seed investing, which has now become a
[Guest]: platform for seed investors.
[Guest]: I think they do like something that features something like 70, 80 deals a year on that
[Guest]: platform.
[Guest]: And it's now got fairly sophisticated.
[Guest]: So now, if we had signal in this room, I would show you, here's this company, 10 crore valuation.
[Guest]: So it falls exactly into the median numbers that we were talking about.
[Guest]: This targeted two and a half crores, lead investor, Mohit Satyanand.
[Guest]: You click on that, it shows you a profile of Mohit Satyanand, this is what he's done
[Guest]: in the past.
[Guest]: This is the number of companies he's led, this is what happened to those companies.
[Guest]: And it says, as of this morning, it said 81 lakhs committed.
[Guest]: And each person who commits, now their mugshot comes in as well.
[Guest]: And that's a live bar.
[Guest]: So it was 81 lakhs when I woke up this morning.
[Guest]: And just before we came into this recording, it was 96 lakhs.
[Amit Varma]: So they're moving towards their target of two and a half.
[Amit Varma]: So you're buying shares into an angel investing fund, so to say, or an angel investment, online.
[Guest]: Your committee online.
[Guest]: Your committee.
[Amit Varma]: Then of course, all the rest of it happens.
[Guest]: So now there are these platforms emerging.
[Guest]: And so the platforms began emerging five, seven years ago, but they've become richer.
[Guest]: They've taken on board a lot of feedback.
[Guest]: So it's much clearer now, what is the role of a lead investor?
[Guest]: And what they're now trying to do is to make these lead investors into brands, as it were.
[Guest]: So if I'm successful, one day I'll be a brand.
[Guest]: I'm already, as far as they're concerned, I'm a brand.
[Guest]: I'm this lead investor who's led four or five investments, two or three of which have been
[Guest]: extraordinarily successful.
[Guest]: We still have invested behind them.
[Guest]: So now I've become a flag bearer for other people to sort of stand in my, what they call,
[Guest]: syndicate.
[Guest]: And now they've started defining other things.
[Guest]: So for example, I'm going to put in two or three years of effort in shepherding this
[Guest]: company, hopefully to the next stage, where it's valued at a hundred crores.
[Guest]: I need to be rewarded for that beyond the 20 lakhs of family money that I've put in.
[Guest]: And so that too is now formalized.
[Guest]: And it says that all the people who invest behind him, when they get an exit, 15% of
[Guest]: the upside that they make.
[Guest]: So if they've invested five lakhs and that's now worth a crore, I get 15% of that 95, which
[Guest]: is called the carry.
[Guest]: So you can see that in four or five years, it's already become a very, very mature ecosystem
[Guest]: with syndicates and lead investors and investor directors and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And what about an issue which, you know, has been in the news for a couple of years about
[Guest]: the angel tax?
[Guest]: What is this angel tax?
[Guest]: Yeah, it's, I think it's now largely resolved.
[Guest]: And this is something where I must publicly acknowledge the role of one person.
[Guest]: And I'm not saying that he was solely responsible, but that was my point of interaction, which
[Guest]: is Amitabh Ganth, who is the CEO of Niti Aayog.
[Guest]: And so almost exactly a year ago at Jaipur Literature Festival 2019, where he was a guest,
[Guest]: and he was talking about make in India and so on and so forth.
[Guest]: I was, I have to say a little sarcastic with him.
[Guest]: And I said, you know, Amitabh, you're making all these statements on stage.
[Guest]: But the fact is that here are these startups, and they're getting screwed with this angel
[Guest]: tax.
[Guest]: Yeah, it's the angel tax.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So actually, it was not an angel tax.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: It was a tax which was brought in by the last government for a completely different reason.
[Guest]: But when it came inappropriately to be applied to startups, it got called the angel tax.
[Guest]: Now, that tax was in order, I think it was a reasonably well conceived tax.
[Guest]: It was in order to staunch the ecosystems that have been set up to launder money to
[Guest]: convert black money into white and vice versa.
[Guest]: So you had shell companies.
[Guest]: And so I would subscribe to this shell company at the rate of 50,000 rupees a share.
[Guest]: And then two years later, I would be told that the value of the share is only one rupee.
[Guest]: And so my money has gone down the drain.
[Guest]: But actually, I needed some cash.
[Guest]: And so that cash was paid back to me.
[Guest]: So these became these shell companies.
[Guest]: And obviously, on this other side was somebody who wanted to do the opposite and the shell
[Guest]: company made a transaction fee from both sides.
[Guest]: So what the tax did, and I've forgotten the exact number of the income tax act under which
[Guest]: it came into being, what it said was that where the income tax officer believes that
[Guest]: there is some misrepresentation of the underlying value, he or she can look at the existing
[Guest]: assets of that shell company and determine that the amount paid for the shares of that
[Guest]: company was inappropriate.
[Guest]: And therefore say that it's completely irrational that you should pay 50,000 rupees a share
[Guest]: for a company which has no assets.
[Guest]: And that entire amount is going to be taxed.
[Guest]: I think it was well-intentioned.
[Guest]: It was addressing a clear tax dodge.
[Guest]: Unfortunately, the same thing, the same logic applied to a startup almost works.
[Guest]: Because it says, you have no assets, you just have an idea.
[Guest]: And I'm putting a value of 10 crores on it.
[Guest]: So if you look at just the numbers, there's a logic to saying that if that penal tax is
[Guest]: applicable on that shell company, unfortunately, I have to say most of them in Calcutta.
[Guest]: But I don't want to tar all Calcutta businesses with that brush.
[Guest]: Then why shouldn't it be applicable to your idea of sound nation or sound cloud or whatever
[Guest]: it is?
[Guest]: Now, my point and that of everybody in the ecosystem was that surely an income tax officer
[Guest]: can distinguish a shell company from a startup.
[Guest]: Perhaps this was naive.
[Guest]: But it was clear that this was being misused across the board.
[Guest]: So what Amitabh Khan said at that stage was that we need this to be certified by third
[Guest]: party.
[Guest]: Is this a startup?
[Guest]: Because it can't be to the discretion of the income tax officer and Niti Aayog or the Ministry
[Guest]: of Industry or make in India or whatever have no mandate to dictate to the income tax department
[Guest]: what they do.
[Guest]: And so what they did was to create this DPI certification for what is a startup.
[Guest]: Now, it's unfortunate that you have to now create a new department, a new paperwork for
[Guest]: a startup to prove that it is a startup.
[Guest]: And it's unnecessary fiction for a startup.
[Guest]: It's unnecessary fiction.
[Guest]: But the fact is that it's worked.
[Guest]: And those two or three startups where I'd invested, which were being sent notices and
[Guest]: we were all being asked to furnish all kinds of details as angel investors and so on, their
[Guest]: cases got sorted out, they got withdrawn.
[Guest]: And over the last eight, nine months, I have not heard of any such case.
[Guest]: So I have to say that it's worked.
[Guest]: And Amitabh Kant came to Jaipur Literature Festival this year.
[Amit Varma]: I did a panel with him, and I linked that from the show notes, because it's the most
[Amit Varma]: enjoyable conversation.
[Amit Varma]: We shall not say anything more about it, but kindly watch it.
[Guest]: But I started by thanking him for that, for that initiative, because it really worked.
[Amit Varma]: Who said Amitabh Kant?
[Amit Varma]: He did.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, before we wind up, you've been doing this for five years, but of course,
[Amit Varma]: you have a lifetime of experience behind it, which has fed into angel investing.
[Amit Varma]: At the same time, it's not as if you are, you know, sitting at an elevated level and
[Amit Varma]: putting your money.
[Amit Varma]: You're also because of your mentorship, you're also deeply involved, you're also learning
[Amit Varma]: entrepreneurship while you're doing it.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll ask you two questions, and you can take whichever one first.
[Amit Varma]: One is, what is your advice to young entrepreneurs today?
[Amit Varma]: And like, what learnings would you have, which you think that they should know, they need
[Amit Varma]: to know before they get into it?
[Amit Varma]: And two, what is your advice for other people like you, who would wish to invest?
[Guest]: How should they go about it?
[Guest]: For both of them, my first and overriding advice is, do it.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: No, absolutely, absolutely.
[Guest]: To young people, I would say, this is the time to dream.
[Guest]: And there's never been a moment in the history of mankind, of capitalism, of entrepreneurship,
[Guest]: which is so supportive of new ideas.
[Guest]: And so rich with possibilities.
[Guest]: So rich with possibilities, never, never, never.
[Guest]: Will it last?
[Guest]: I think it will.
[Guest]: But that's irrelevant.
[Guest]: For you as a young entrepreneur today, it exists.
[Guest]: It never existed before.
[Guest]: Go out and do it.
[Guest]: That's number one.
[Guest]: Number two, I have to say this, despite not being perhaps the most impartial person, but
[Guest]: find a mentor.
[Guest]: And I'm saying this not because of my experience as a mentor.
[Guest]: I'm saying this because the evidence from Silicon Valley, where of course the system
[Guest]: was in a sense created and where it's the richest and has the most number of hits and
[Guest]: successes and so on, that academic studies have shown that startups with an entrepreneur,
[Guest]: with a mentor, do significantly better than those without.
[Guest]: So there's something to be learned from fuddy old duddies like me.
[Guest]: So that's the second, get a mentor.
[Guest]: And the third, which is related to the first is, as we discussed, there's no stigma to
[Guest]: failure.
[Guest]: Coming to the second, which is people who want to invest in startups, absolutely, firstly,
[Guest]: do it.
[Guest]: Secondly, don't ever make the mistake of saying, let me try one or two and see if they work.
[Guest]: Because all the data from all around the world shows that three or four or five out of 10
[Guest]: are going to fail and you're going to get no money back.
[Guest]: And the way probability works is that for at least three or four or five people, if
[Guest]: they only invest in two, they're going to fail.
[Guest]: And therefore, you're going to be out of it.
[Guest]: You need to have a program which says, I'm going to invest over the next two or three
[Guest]: years in 10 or 15 or 20.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, we discussed this in the episode that we did together on poker and investing
[Amit Varma]: that volume is key.
[Guest]: Volume is key.
[Guest]: And I would say that 20 to 30 is sort of the minimum threshold.
[Guest]: Not as if to say that, you know, you pick any 20 and throw money at them.
[Guest]: You obviously exercise discretion, judgment, interaction, understanding, experience, interacting
[Guest]: with other people.
[Guest]: But irrespective of all of that, you could be on the wrong side of the probability distribution
[Guest]: and end up with the first three or four all failing.
[Guest]: And in fact, the odds are higher because you haven't yet sharpened your intuition.
[Guest]: So the odds of the first three or four being failure are much higher than the odds of the
[Guest]: next three or four being failures.
[Guest]: So if you've decided to get into this, put aside a pool of capital that you're willing
[Guest]: to put at risk and say that if the first one fails, that's fine.
[Guest]: That's to be expected.
[Guest]: If the second one fails, that's to be expected.
[Guest]: But I'm in this for a minimum of 10 or 15.
[Amit Varma]: And don't give up till then.
[Amit Varma]: These are very wise words for anything in life.
[Amit Varma]: Don't give up.
[Amit Varma]: So, Mohit, I always learn a hell of a lot whenever I chat with you.
[Amit Varma]: And even though I'm not neither a budding entrepreneur, nor do I have any money to invest,
[Amit Varma]: this has been very illuminating for me.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you so much for coming on the show.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks so much, Amit.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, you can follow Mohit on Twitter at Mohit Satyanand,
[Amit Varma]: all one word.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me on Twitter at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse past episodes of The Scene and the Unseen at sceneunseen.in and thingpragati.com.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening.
[Unknown]: Bye.